Improve concepts documentation related to models (#10231)
pydantic/pydantic: docs/concepts/models.md

* `id`, which is an integer and is required
* `name`, which is a string and is not required (it has a default value).

The model can then be instantiated:

```py group="basic-model"
user = User(id='123')
```

`user` is an instance of `User`. Initialization of the object will perform all parsing and validation.
If no [`ValidationError`][pydantic_core.ValidationError] exception is raised,
you know the resulting model instance is valid.

Fields of a model can be accessed as normal attributes of the `user` object:

```py group="basic-model"
assert user.name == 'Jane Doe'  # (1)!
assert user.id == 123
assert isinstance(user.id, int)
```

> 1. `name` wasn't set when `user` was initialized, so the default value was used.

Author: The following changes are mainly moving example snippets below the text describing it.

   The [`model_fields_set`][pydantic.BaseModel.model_fields_set] attribute can be
   inspected to check the field names explicitly set during instantiation.

Note that the string `'123'` was coerced to an integer and its value is `123`.

> More details on Pydantic's coercion logic can be found in the [Data Conversion](#data-conversion) section.

Author: Good catch

The model instance can be serialized using the [`model_dump`][pydantic.BaseModel.model_dump] method:

```py group="basic-model"
assert user.model_dump() == {'id': 123, 'name': 'Jane Doe'}
```

Calling [dict][] on the instance will also provide a dictionary, but nested fields will not be
recursively converted into dictionaries. [`model_dump`][pydantic.BaseModel.model_dump] also
provides numerous arguments to customize the serialization result.

By default, models are mutable and field values can be changed through attribute assignment:

```py group="basic-model"
user.id = 321
assert user.id == 321
```

> !!! warning

Author: Warning moved from below, nothing changed.

    When defining your models, watch out for naming collisions between your field name and its type annotation.

    For example, the following will not behave as expected and would yield a validation error:

    ```py test="skip"
    from typing import Optional

    from pydantic import BaseModel

    class Boo(BaseModel):
        int: Optional[int] = None

    m = Boo(int=123)  # Will fail to validate.
    ```

    Because of how Python evaluates [annotated assignment statements][annassign], the statement is equivalent to `int: None = None`, thus
    leading to a validation error.

### Model methods and properties

The example above only shows the tip of the iceberg of what models can do.
Models possess the following methods and attributes:

> * [`model_validate()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate]: Validates any object into a model. See [Validating data](#validating-data).

Author: Mainly reordering, and made descriptions consistent with each other.

> * [`model_validate()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate]: Validates any object into a model. See [Validating data](#validating-data).

Reviewer: Hmm, I feel like we want to be more specific here, maybe something more similar to the wording from the API docs, like "Validate the given object against the Pydantic model"

I'm tempted to add something about adhering to schema, but maybe that's too verbose for this brief explanation

Reviewer: Sort of implied with "validation"

"""
```

Self-referencing models are supported. For more details, see [postponed annotations](postponed_annotations.md#self-referencing-or-recursive-models).

## Rebuilding model schema

When you define a model class in your code, Pydantic will analyze the body of the class to collect a variety of information
required to perform validation and serialization, gathered in a core schema. Notably, the model's type annotations are evaluated to
understand the valid types for each field (more information can be found in the [Architecture](../architecture.md) documentation).

> However, it might be the case that annotations refers to symbols not defined when the model class is being created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it might be the case that annotations refer to symbols not defined when the model class is being created.
```

"""
```

Self-referencing models are supported. For more details, see [postponed annotations](postponed_annotations.md#self-referencing-or-recursive-models).

> ## Rebuilding the model

Reviewer: I think this should be "Rebuilding model schema", as we don't rebuild the model entirely

Author: I wanted to avoid mentioning the concept of "schema", which isn't introduced at this point in the docs. But "Rebuilding the model" makes it like the model is completely redefined, which isn't quite true. I'll adapt the description to have a quick explanation of what a core schema is.

> When you define a model class in your code, Pydantic will analyze the body of the class to collect a number of information
> required to perform validation and serialization. Notably, the type annotations are evaluated to understand the valid types
> for each field (more information can be found in the [Architecture](../architecture.md) documentation). However, it might be
> that annotations refers to symbols not defined when the model class is being created. To circumvent this issue, the
> [`model_rebuild()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_rebuild] method can be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you define a model class in your code, Pydantic will analyze the body of the class to collect information
required to perform validation and serialization. Notably, the model's type annotations are evaluated to understand the type constraints
for each field (more information can be found in the [Architecture](../architecture.md) documentation). However, it might be the case that some annotations refer to symbols not yet defined when the model class is being created. To circumvent this issue, the [`model_rebuild()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_rebuild] method can be used:
```

Specifically, I don't think the "a number of" part is proper English. You could say "a variety of..." instead

## Arbitrary class instances

(Formerly known as "ORM Mode"/`from_orm`).

Pydantic models can also be created from arbitrary class instances by reading the instance attributes corresponding
to the model field names. One common application of this functionality is integration with object-relational mappings
(ORMs).

To do this, set the [`from_attributes`][pydantic.config.ConfigDict.from_attributes] config value to `True`
(see the documentation on [Configuration](./config.md) for more details).

The example here uses [SQLAlchemy](https://www.sqlalchemy.org/), but the same approach should work for any ORM.

> ```py

Author: Example rewritten to use the new SQLAlchemy constructs.

    pass

class CompanyOrm(Base):
    __tablename__ = 'companies'

    id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True, nullable=False)
    public_key = Column(String(20), index=True, nullable=False, unique=True)
    name = Column(String(63), unique=True)
    domains = Column(ARRAY(String(255)))
    id: Mapped[int] = mapped_column(primary_key=True, nullable=False)
    public_key: Mapped[str] = mapped_column(
        String(20), index=True, nullable=False, unique=True
    )
    domains: Mapped[List[str]] = mapped_column(ARRAY(String(255)))

class CompanyModel(BaseModel):
    model_config = ConfigDict(from_attributes=True)

    id: int
    public_key: Annotated[str, StringConstraints(max_length=20)]
    name: Annotated[str, StringConstraints(max_length=63)]
    domains: List[Annotated[str, StringConstraints(max_length=255)]]

co_orm = CompanyOrm(
    id=123,
    public_key='foobar',
    name='Testing',
    domains=['example.com', 'foobar.com'],
)
print(co_orm)
#> <__main__.CompanyOrm object at 0x0123456789ab>
co_model = CompanyModel.model_validate(co_orm)
print(co_model)
"""
id=123 public_key='foobar' name='Testing' domains=['example.com', 'foobar.com']
"""
```

> ### Reserved names

Author: I decided to delete this section, as it seems overly specific and similar information can be found in the aliases docs.

Reviewer: Agreed that this can be removed - could you add this (bc it's in the context of a sqlalchemy pattern) to the examples section instead?

Author: Let's create an issue related to doc examples and SQLAlchemy. I'll link this comment for reference so that we can tackle this properly. wdyt?

Reviewer: Sounds great - could you create this issue + link this one!

Author: Created https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic/issues/10251

    """
```

## Validating data

> !!! note

Author: Note moved from below. Nothing changed.

Reviewer: Hmm I'm tempted to leave this down below, as it might lead folks to skip past a simple explanation of `model_validate_json`... up to you though, I don't have a strong opinion

Author: Ah yes did not pay attention to the fact this note was related to JSON. I initially moved it because it was next to two other notes, making the section a bit overloaded. I'll move it right after the `model_validate_json`

then pass it to [`model_validate`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate].

!!! note
    Depending on the types and model configs involved, [`model_validate`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate]
    and [`model_validate_json`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate_json] may have different validation behavior.
    If you have data coming from a non-JSON source, but want the same validation
    behavior and errors you'd get from [`model_validate_json`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate_json],
    our recommendation for now is to use either use `model_validate_json(json.dumps(data))`, or use [`model_validate_strings`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate_strings] if the data takes the form of a (potentially nested) dictionary with string keys and values.

!!! note
    If you're passing in an instance of a model to [`model_validate`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_validate], you will want to consider setting
    [`revalidate_instances`][pydantic.ConfigDict.revalidate_instances] in the model's config.
    If you don't set this value, then validation will be skipped on model instances. See the below example:

>     === ":x: `revalidate_instances='never'`"

Author: Example was indented correctly, almost nothing changed (some rewording in comments).

!!! note
    In Pydantic V2, the performance gap between `BaseModel.__init__` and `BaseModel.model_construct` has been narrowed
    considerably. For simple models, calling `BaseModel.__init__` may even be faster. If you are using [`model_construct()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_construct]
    for performance reasons, you may want to profile your use case before assuming that [`model_construct()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_construct] is faster.
    In Pydantic V2, the performance gap between validation (either with direct instantiation or the `model_validate*` methods)
    and [`model_construct()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_construct] has been narrowed
    considerably. For simple models, going with validation may even be faster. If you are using [`model_construct()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_construct]
    for performance reasons, you may want to profile your use case before assuming it is actually faster.

!!! warning
    [`model_construct()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_construct] does not do any validation, meaning it can create models which are invalid. **You should only

>     ever use the [`model_construct()`][pydantic.main.BaseModel.model_construct] method with data which has already been validated, or that you definitely trust.**

Author: I removed this warning as imo it repeats what was said above (and _with validation_ is marked in bold). Can be readded if necessary.

Reviewer: Let's add back. I think this was only added bc people kept complaining about it, so having the explanation and warning helps to cover us from unnecessary issues. Generally, I agree with your point about this being redundant though.

> ```py

Author: This section was removed as it seems pretty specific. I updated the argument docstring of `_fields_set` to better reflect what it does.

Reviewer: Agreed, this definitely doesn't need to be included - same request though, can we move this to `examples`?

Author: Imo the improved docstring is enough to understand what it does. Examples should probably cover "broader" aspects, such as integrating with 3rd party libraries (SQLAlchemy, logfire, etc) or how to implement complex core schema generation, etc.

Reviewer: I suppose - let's link this to the `examples` issue just in case.

> 2. Declare a pydantic model that inherits from [`BaseModel`][pydantic.BaseModel] and [`typing.Generic`][],

Reviewer: Maybe specify "in that order" unless we specify elsewhere, I remember this being a point of confusion for folks

    """
```

> 1. Refers to the step 1 described above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Refers to step 1 described above.
```

And likewise for the others. Great idea to have annotations here (that numerically correspond, nicely)

2. Refers to the step 2 described above.
3. Refers to the step 3 described above.

Any [configuration](./config.md), [validation](./validators.md) or [serialization](./serialization.md) logic
set on the generic model will also be applied to the parametrized classes, in the same way as when inheriting from
a model class. Any custom methods or attributes will also be inherited.

Generic models also integrate properly with type checkers, so you get all the type checking
you would expect if you were to declare a distinct type for each parametrization.

!!! note

>     Internally, Pydantic creates subclasses of the generic model at runtime when they are parametrized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Internally, Pydantic creates subclasses of the generic model at runtime when the generic model class is parametrized.
```

    """
```

!!! warning
    While it may not raise an error, we strongly advise against using parametrized generics in [`isinstance()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#isinstance) checks.

    For example, you should not do `isinstance(my_model, MyGenericModel[int])`. However, it is fine to do `isinstance(my_model, MyGenericModel)` (note that, for standard generics, it would raise an error to do a subclass check with a parameterized generic class).

>     If you need to perform [`isinstance()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functions.html#isinstance) checks against parametrized generics, you can do this by subclassing the parametrized generic class:

Reviewer: Moved from below 👍

    ```py test="skip" lint="skip"
    class MyIntModel(MyGenericModel[int]): ...

    isinstance(my_model, MyIntModel)
    ```

### Validation of unparametrized type variables

When leaving type variables unparametrized, Pydantic treats generic models similarly to how it treats built-in generic
types like [`list`][] and [`dict`][]:

* If the type variable is [bound](https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/generics.html#type-variables-with-upper-bounds)
  or [constrained](https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/generics.html#type-variables-with-constraints) to a specific type,
  it will be used.
* If the type variable has a default type (as specified by [PEP 696](https://peps.python.org/pep-0696/)), it will be used.

> * For unbound or unconstrained type variables, Pydantic will fallback to [`Any`][typing.Any].

Reviewer: Nice work with typing docs xrefs

```py
from typing import Generic

from typing_extensions import TypeVar

from pydantic import BaseModel, ValidationError

T = TypeVar('T')
U = TypeVar('U', bound=int)
V = TypeVar('V', default=str)

class Model(BaseModel, Generic[T, U, V]):
    t: T
    u: U
    v: V

print(Model(t='t', u=1, v='v'))
#> t='t' u=1 v='v'

try:
    Model(t='t', u='u', v=1)
except ValidationError as exc:
    print(exc)
    """
    2 validation errors for Model
    u
      Input should be a valid integer, unable to parse string as an integer [type=int_parsing, input_value='u', input_type=str]
    v
      Input should be a valid string [type=string_type, input_value=1, input_type=int]
    """
```

!!! warning

>     If a subtype of the type variable upper bound, constraints or default is being used and the model isn't explicitly parametrized, the resulting type **will not be** the one being provided. In the case of type variables bound to Pydantic models, this can lead to a data loss:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If a subtype of the type variable upper bound, constraints, or default is being used and the model isn't explicitly parametrized, the resulting type **will not be** the one being provided. In the case of type variables bound to Pydantic models, this can lead to a data loss:
```

Oxford comma adds clarity here ^^

This sentence is a bit long, what if we simplified to:

In some cases, validation against an unparametrized generic model can lead to data loss. Specifically, if a subtype of the type variable upper bound, constraints, or default is validated, ...

    ```py
    from typing import Generic, TypeVar

    from pydantic import BaseModel

    ItemT = TypeVar('ItemT', bound='ItemBase')

    class ItemBase(BaseModel): ...

    class IntItem(ItemBase):
        value: int

    class ItemHolder(BaseModel, Generic[ItemT]):
        item: ItemT

    loaded_data = {'item': {'value': 1}}

    print(ItemHolder(**loaded_data))  # (1)!
    #> item=ItemBase()

    print(ItemHolder[IntItem](**loaded_data))  # (2)!
    #> item=IntItem(value=1)
    ```

    1. When the generic isn't parametrized, the input data is validated against the `ItemT` upper bound.
       Given that `ItemBase` has no fields, the `item` field information is lost.
    2. In this case, the type variable is explicitly parametrized, so the input data is validated against the `IntItem` class.

> ### Serialization of unparametrized type variables

Reviewer: Nice job with the sections here

> The behavior of serialization differs when using type variables with [upper bounds](https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/generics.html#type-variables-with-upper-bounds) or [constraints](https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/generics.html#type-variables-with-constraints)/a default value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The behavior of serialization differs when using type variables with [upper bounds](https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/generics.html#type-variables-with-upper-bounds), [constraints](https://typing.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/generics.html#type-variables-with-constraints), or a default value:
```
